Financial management is about controlling the flow of money in and out of the organization. Every business needs to sell products or services, pay expenses, balance the books, and file taxes. Financial management encompasses all of this, along with more complex processes, such as paying employees, buying supplies, and submitting reports to government agencies to show they’re obeying applicable laws and regulations. The act of overseeing all these transactions for a business is what we mean when we talk about a company’s financial management. In general, the bigger the company, the more complicated financial management becomes.

Employees who specialize in financial management are responsible for all the money going into and out of the company. Smaller companies will have at least one accountant or bookkeeper who works with the bank to execute these transactions and track the flow of money. Large companies will often have entire finance teams led by a chief financial officer (CFO), controller, head of finance, or someone with a similar title.

The finance team’s primary job is to make sure the company stays solvent and never runs out of cash—but it’s not their only job. They’re also responsible for handling loans and debts, balancing the books, overseeing investments, raising venture capital, and managing public offerings (i.e. selling company stock on the open market). Basically, the finance team protects a company’s financial resources, monitors and controls all transactions, and takes steps to make the company as profitable as possible.

Key Takeaways

Financial management is all about monitoring, controlling, protecting, and reporting on a company’s financial resources.
Companies have accountants or finance teams responsible for managing their finances, including all bank transactions, loans, debts, investments, and other sources of funding.
Finance teams are also responsible for ensuring the company follows all regulations, stays solvent, and is as profitable as possible.