Quantum computing is a multidisciplinary field comprising aspects of computer science, physics, and mathematics that utilizes quantum mechanics to solve complex problems faster than on classical computers. The field of quantum computing includes hardware research and application development. Quantum computers are able to solve certain types of problems faster than classical computers by taking advantage of quantum mechanical effects, such as superposition and quantum interference. Some applications where quantum computers can provide such a speed boost include machine learning (ML), optimization, and simulation of physical systems. Eventual use cases could be portfolio optimization in finance or the simulation of chemical systems, solving problems that are currently impossible for even the most powerful supercomputers on the market.

What is the quantum computing advantage?
Currently, no quantum computer can perform a useful task faster, cheaper, or more efficiently than a classical computer. Quantum advantage is the threshold where we have built a quantum system that can perform operations that the best possible classical computer cannot simulate in any kind of reasonable time.

What is quantum mechanics?
Quantum mechanics is the area of physics that studies the behavior of particles at a microscopic level. At subatomic levels, the equations that describe how particles behave is different from those that describe the macroscopic world around us. Quantum computers take advantage of these behaviors to perform computations in a completely new way.

What is a qubit?
Quantum bits, or qubits, are represented by quantum particles. The manipulation of qubits by control devices is at the core of a quantum computer's processing power. Qubits in quantum computers are analogous to bits in classical computers. At its core, a classical machine's processor does all its work by manipulating bits. Similarly, the quantum processor does all its work by processing qubits.

How are qubits different from classical bits?
In classical computing, a bit is an electronic signal that is either on or off. The value of the classical bit can thus be one (on) or zero (off). However, because the qubit is based on the laws of quantum mechanics it can be placed in a superposition of states.

What are the principles of quantum computing?
A quantum computer works using quantum principles. Quantum principles require a new dictionary of terms to be fully understood, terms that include superposition, entanglement, and decoherence. Let's understand these principles below.

Superposition
Superposition states that, much like waves in classical physics, you can add two or more quantum states and the result will be another valid quantum state. Conversely, you can also represent every quantum state as a sum of two or more other distinct states. This superposition of qubits gives quantum computers their inherent parallelism, allowing them to process millions of operations simultaneously.

Entanglement
Quantum entanglement occurs when two systems link so closely that knowledge about one gives you immediate knowledge about the other, no matter how far apart they are. Quantum processors can draw conclusions about one particle by measuring another one. For example, they can determine that if one qubit spins upward, the other will always spin downward, and vice versa. Quantum entanglement allows quantum computers to solve complex problems faster.

When a quantum state is measured, the wavefunction collapses and you measure the state as either a zero or a one. In this known or deterministic state, the qubit acts as a classical bit. Entanglement is the ability of qubits to correlate their state with other qubits.

Decoherence
Decoherence is the loss of the quantum state in a qubit. Environmental factors, like radiation, can cause the quantum state of the qubits to collapse. A large engineering challenge in constructing a quantum computer is designing the various features that attempt to delay decoherence of the state, such as building specialty structures that shield the qubits from external fields.